I would love to introduce you today to not only my Posit co-host Isabella Velazquez.
Isabella, would you like to say hello? Hi everyone! Yes, and also special Posit co-host
guest today, Rachel is here. Rachel, you want to say hi? Hey, I'm just hanging out. I just
happened to not have a meeting at this time, so I'm like, I'm going to jump in. So exciting!
If you don't know Rachel, Rachel is the person who many years ago started the Data Science
Hangout, and she's the reason pretty much that the domino effect of all of us being
here happened. And of course, our lab manager for today, we have Ella Kaye. Ella, would
you like to introduce yourself? Hello? Yes. Hi, I'm Ella. Professionally, I am a senior
research software engineer at the University of Birmingham, which is taking me some getting
used to because I've only been there for less than a month. Very excited to be there.
I work on Base R and in particular trying to get people to contribute to Base R. So
this is very much in my wheelhouse today and delighted for the opportunity to speak on
this subject and delighted that so many of you are here. Thank you so much Libby and
Isabella for inviting me. Well, we are super excited to talk about this. I don't know about
everybody else, but I learned Base R first. It's all I learned. I learned it in undergrad
in university and I did not learn the tidyverse until like 2021. I was mostly grad school,
graduated working in my first day at a job. So I would love to hear from everybody in
the chat your path through R. Are you a Base R girly? Do you like me think in Base R and
then have to translate that actively into something else before you type it? Because
I often find myself doing that even after years of teaching tidyverse. So I think it
would be great to get started Ella. Oh, go ahead.
Yes. So I have for an icebreaker here today some R code and Libby warned me when prepping
for this that some folks might not even be quite familiar with the distinction between
Base R and tidyverse and might not think that they know Base R when maybe they do know more
Base R than they think they do. So we decided to get started with a what's Base R, what's
tidyverse. So here is a very short R script which mixes Base R and tidyverse. So let's
get started with what's Base R here and what's tidyverse. So I would love to get some feedback
from the chat in like what do you recognize as Base R and what do you recognize as tidyverse?
Because I have done this to look like tidyverse code, but there is some sneaky Base R sneaking
in. All right. A lot of people are typing in the chat right here. Lauren says master's
program taught Base R first and then we moved into RStudio and tidyverse. Moving into RStudio
tells me that maybe Base R and console R is what you were using first, Lauren. All
of my R files in undergrad were definitely just text files. I didn't use like dot R files
for a couple of years. Oh, a little shout out here for the O'Whaley package by Fonty Carr.
I have a little whale in my console because randomly two times out of every seven times
I open my R console, I get a whale telling me a pun. I love it. Fonty, that's amazing. If you
don't know who Fonty Carr is, you can look up Fonty on Blue Sky. I think you'll find Fonty
there. Okay. So Lauren says yes, R console and then RStudio. Josh says R library mean C all
Base R functions. Aha. Library function, mean function and the C function which stands for
combine, I believe. It does. I will let you answer that, but I think Josh has it.
Yeah, there's more though. There are more. What else are we missing? What else in there is Base R?
Hey, Nick. Alex says master's program only taught Sass.
Moved on to Base and Tidyverse so fast after that. Nick, same.
So I snuck in a couple more bits of Base R that might be hard to spot, particularly if people
aren't familiar with these relatively recent additions to Base R. One of them is penguins.
If you're familiar with the penguins dataset from Palmer Penguins, as of R 4.5, the penguins
data is now in Base R. There is no library Palmer Penguins here. This penguins is coming to you
courtesy of Base R. And another thing that is might not recognize immediately as Base R, but
these color names are built into Base R. So the ability to name a color and have that plotted,
the ability to have it as a hex, and again, another relatively new addition is the ability to
specify a three digit hex. This was new in R 4.3, I believe. I've been a little bit sneaky here in
my choice of what Base R to add to here because I am highlighting here a couple of contributions
that I made. So putting penguins into Base R was something that I worked on as was three digit
hexes. So yeah, folks contribute to Base R and the language evolves and changes and it keeps doing
so. And these are some recent additions. That's so exciting. Thank you, Ella. Everybody say thank
you, Ella, for making penguins in Base R a thing. That excites me to no end. But we will also point
out that Jeff said, what type of pipe is that? Well, that is the native pipe in R, but that's
just the font that Ella's using that turns it into that triangle. Ella, you want to talk about that?
I do, because I really love typography. So yeah, so this, I was going to mention this,
so thank you for reminding me that I wanted to talk about this. It's the Base R pipe,
and we type it with a pipe like that, and then a greater than or equals to sign, and then that,
it happened really quickly, but that put them together.
I'll put it into the Discord chat in its original form before it gets transformed by the font.
It's easier for other people to see. I can change my font settings here. So I use a font called
MonoVisa, and this I've got by preference of version with ligatures, but I will change that
setting. And I think Fira Code is also one that turned that into. Fira Code, we'll do that for
you. That's a free font, because I'm a bit. Fira and MonoVisa, the Fira Code.
Okay. Well, we are 11 minutes in, so we better start moving on.
I am going to do a live demo, and the thing that I'm going to live demo necessarily takes time,
because we're going to talk about contributing to Base R, and we're going to do that by means
of a live demo of me fixing a bug in Base R. I wasn't quite brave enough to do an outstanding
bug. I'm going to take us back to a bug that existed in a previous version of R that is now
fixed, and I'll talk to you when I do it about why I'm doing that bug. But I also wanted to talk a
little bit while I'm getting going with this. So, I'm going to start by going to a GitHub link on
the RDevel organization. So, this is the organization that belongs to the R Contribute
Working Group, and I'll be saying more about them later. And I am going to go to RDevEnv.
And what I'm going to do here is I'm going to scroll down from here, and we're going to spin
up a code space by clicking this open in GitHub code spaces. And that's going to happen. And most
of these settings are good, except I'm in the UK, so I'm going to choose Europe West here.
We're going to create a code space, and this is going to take about two and a half to three minutes
just to initialize that. So, while we're doing that, I'm just going to talk a little bit about
what do I even mean by base R and by contributing to base R. So, we had a look at a few base R
functions, but really when we're talking about base R, what I mean by that is what we get when
we download R. Like, if we go to rproject.org and click through to download R, what are we getting?
And it is a little bit of a fudge to call this base R because the R distribution that you
download, the functions that you can run without any other calls to library is actually a collection
of packages. We don't always think of them as packages because we don't have to load them with
library, but there are a collection of packages, and base is one of those packages, but there are
many others, and there is a link, and hopefully Isabella will share it, which is all the packages
that come when you download base R. So, there's base, but there's also utils and data sets and
stats and a whole host of others. So, that's what we mean by base R. I'm using it to refer to that
whole distribution, and by contributing to base R, there are lots of different ways that people
can do that. So, if I look like I'm looking off slightly to my right, it's because I've got some
notes on another monitor just to my right here. So, by contributing to base R, tons of different
ways to do that with varying different levels of technical proficiency. So, one thing that people
can do is review bugs and analyse them and comment on them. There's the Bugzilla platform for that
that I'll be showing later. There is also the opportunity to fix bugs and to test proposed
fixes, or even filing a bug report. If you come across a bug in base R, it's really great to know
about that. But it's not all about the code. There's also documentation, so there are contributions
around improving documentation for functions in base R, and then there's a whole other side of
contributing to base R, which is around translations. So, all of our messages, everything that appears
in the console was written in English, but there has been extraordinary work going on for a number
of years to translate those messages so that those are picked up by people's locales, and there's a
whole team working on that as well. So, that is another way of contributing to base R. But we are
going to do a fix. So, we are going to fix a bug in the stem function. So, I'm going to go back here
to my Positron, and I'm going to show a script that I've got here, which shows stem. But I'm
also up here, I'm in the latest release of R. I'm in R 4.5.3. But R has the Positron makes it
really easy to switch between different versions of R. So, I'm going to open up a new interpreter
session, and I'm going to go back to R 4.4.3, which is where this version of the bug last existed.
So, we have a vector in R. Can people see my console down at the bottom there? Are we good for
seeing? I can see it. Yes. Everybody okay? I think we're okay. And we have a couple of questions
stacking up already. So, whenever you want to take a break to answer a couple, we can do that.
Yes. Let's have some questions. All right. So, Josh had asked, I'm wondering if the base R team
has a help wanted slash good first issue space similar to what R OpenSci has? And I think we're
going to get to resources in just a little bit. So, that might be part of it. But do you have a
quick answer for this one now? Yeah. So, that doesn't exist really in R's bug tracker, which
is on Bugzilla, which is the one that the R core team uses. But we have a repo under the R Devel
organization for R Dev Days, and I'm definitely going to be talking about R Dev Days later,
which feature some, like, handpicked issues that we hope people will work on on developer days.
It's not quite a kind of get started, because they are ones that have been kind of handpicked
for developer days, but those would be, like, a good indication of the kind of
bugs that you can get started with. Yeah. And today, what Elle is showing with the stem function
is also a great example of, like, something that you could find and you could submit yourself. This
one's already been fixed. We're going back in time. But it is a good example. The other question
was from Rory, and it's a fun one. It says, is there anything especially interesting about the
base R code base, like Easter eggs or fun tidbits? I don't know. Well, one of the things that we're
going to get to today that's kind of fun about R, well, depending on your definition of fun,
is that most a lot of R is not written in R. It's written in C. So, part of the reason that I
picked this bug to talk to today is when we find it, the fix is really simple, but it does take a
little bit of digging and detective work to get to it. And that's why that's part of the fun of it,
and that's what I want to show today. I want to show you some C code, but I also want to show
you that you don't have to be scared of the C code, even if you don't know any C.
Yeah, let's get to it. Let's show the stem function.
So, this is a stem bug as it existed. Well, first, there was a problem with the alignment.
Okay. So, that looks a bit out of whack. So, that was a problem.
Here is stem on a vector of 2, and here is stem on a vector of 1. Hang on. No, nothing. We're
not seeing anything, right? There is nothing. If you do stem on a vector of 1, you don't get
anything, and admittedly, it's not a great plot, but there is no reason in principle why you
couldn't at least have that, and it feels weird to have a line of code where you could expect
something and just for nothing to happen. So, not a life-changing change to the base R code.
Stem is a bit of an anachronistic historical function anyway, but this is a kind of nice
So, what we're going to talk about is how we get to this, how we get, how we dig down to this
problem, and how we fix it, but to do that, we need a copy of the R source code to play with.
So, we don't want to go well, even if we wanted to, we can't go right to the R code itself. That's
maintained and managed only by the R core team, obviously, for good reason. So, we need a copy,
and the easiest place to browse a copy of it is at github.com slash rdevel r-svn, and the reason
it's r-svn is because R is actually developed and version-controlled on subversion, not with Git,
and not on GitHub, so this is only a mirror, but this is one place where we can go to browse the
code, and we can download it as well, as we can from any Git repository, and that gets us one
thing. This gives us a copy of the source files, the source code files to play with and edit,
but we are still missing a couple of other crucial ingredients, and one of those is the ability to
build R from source. So, you've got this bunch of files. It's really just text. We need to kind
of build that into R, and this has historically been a really big barrier to people contributing
to R, because you can build R from source on your own computer, but it takes a lot of set-up,
and it's a big hurdle. And there is a third thing we need, which is the ability to create patch
files. So, sort of like a document that's going to be, you can think of equivalently to a pull
request. So, it's a text file which creates your changes, which records the changes that the R
core team can patch into their copy of R. So, we need three things, and there is a place now where
we can get all of those, and that is in this R dev container which I've just set up. So, we have
this dev container, and at the moment, it's just a container. There's nothing really in it. So,
we're going to walk through a tutorial to get through it. And that tutorial, yes?
STEPHANIE I'm going to interrupt and make sure that we have two things. One, if anybody is
confused about what a stem plot is, please ask so we can explain. But also, how did you get to
the place where you could even spin up the dev container if you could just show that part?
We'll go back again because I'm actually on this page now. So, we're in R develop,
R develop August GitHub on the R dev end, and I went through to this opening GitHub code spaces.
And I clicked that, and that got me now after like two or three minutes of waiting for that
to spin up, that got me that. But the other thing I want from this site is this link here,
which are the docs. Okay? So, I'm going to pull that out separately.
So, I'm going to have that on one side. I'm going to have the dev container on the other side,
and you're just going to see me walk through all of this. But now I don't have quite enough
screen real estate, and I also have this zoom bar here that I want to move out of the way.
Okay. So, I'm going to close down that sidebar. And that gets me a bit more space. Right. So,
we're going to go in here, and we're going to go through the tutorials, and we're going to
specifically go through the one on building R. And this talks us through it, and it talks us
through what we've got. So, the R dev container comes with some handy things. So, it comes with
some environment variables, the build directory, build here, the top source directory, and the
patch directory. So, you'll see how we're going to use those as we go through. And the first thing
we're going to do is we're going to check out the R source code. So, instead of downloading it from
a copy from Git, we're going to get these from Subversion, and there's a code to do that here.
And typically, when we are working on patches and developing base R, we do that from R develop. We
do that from the very latest version of the source code. And that's called the trunk. But that is not
what I want, because I want to take us back in time to the last version of R that had this bug,
and that was R4.4.3.
MADDIE PILGRIM All right. And while we're doing this, let's answer Rory's question, which is
is SVN scary to use?
Is SVN scary to use?
MADDIE PILGRIM Yes. Is it very different, maybe, from Git?
And what, not if you follow these steps.
MADDIE PILGRIM Okay.
MADDIE PILGRIM And you work in the R dev container, because the R dev container has everything you
need in it. So, it's got Subversion, it's got everything we need to build R, and the steps
that I'm going to talk you through, both through the building R and the developing a patch, will
just show you the commands that you need to run, and those are the only ones that you will need.
MADDIE PILGRIM Perfect. Yep. And if anybody,
if you're an RStudio user, and you've ever opened a new project, and you've clicked the thing that
says, like, new project from version control, if you've ever noticed, SVN is one of your options,
like GitHub is one, but SVN is another. So, if you haven't seen that word in a long time,
but you recognize it, that's probably where you see it from.
MADDIE PILGRIM So, we now have in this Subversion,
this SVN directory, this is all the source code. These are all the source code files
for R that we have now copied and have available to us. And then the next thing we're going to do
is we're going to download the recommended packages. So, I'm going to run this line of
code. The rest, other than that one change to 4.4.3, everything else is going to run.
So, I'm downloading the recommended packages. So, we have things like foreign and lattice,
and this is like best practice. And now we're going to change, so that's the source code,
which we've put in the SVN, and now we're going to change to the build directory.
So, we've got this flag. So, the path we want, now we're going to make that directory,
and then we are going to move into it. So, I'm kind of slightly rushing through these
Linux commands, but we're changing directory CD into the build directory.
And we'll see here, this is where it is. There's nothing in here yet in this build directory,
but we're making it and we're in it. And now we're going to configure the build. So, we're
just going to not worry too much about what any of these lines of code are doing, other than knowing
that we can just kind of copy and paste them, and they're all going to work, because we are in the
ARP, you know. They're all going to work. It's just going to work, because it's exactly what
we want in a live demo. It's everything just working. So, this is going to run for about
a minute. And, oh, go ahead. I was like, we have a break or something's running.
Yes, tell me if it is. I was going to say, Amelia asked a question,
but it's for Isabella and I. It says, can a future DS lab be on how to set up dev containers
for things like teaching R or to make it easier for people to run a Shiny app, etc?
Amelia, amazing question. We have so many things coming in the future. That was not on my radar,
but it is now. Isabella is going to put a poll in the chat for you, while we're at our halfway
mark. We're at 26 minutes in. Let's go ahead and do a little poll, because we have a short list
of future topics that we would love to know your opinion on. And there are so many more,
and they're all amazing ideas. Yay, there's a poll. Okay, everybody go vote on your favorites.
While you are voting, I am going to run the command that is going to take the longest. So,
we have all these sources to it. We've got all these, the source code, and we've configured our
build, and now we need to make it. So, we need to actually build R, and to do that, we run this
make command, and this is going to take five to 10 minutes. Don't worry, we've got other things to
talk about for five to 10 minutes, but we are going to set this going. We are going to make R,
and while we are doing this, we are going to dig down and find the stem bug. So, we know what to
fix when this is all made. And to do this, I'm going to take us back into our Positron,
because there are some really nice things that we can see here. So, this is a trick that folks may
or may not be familiar with, but when we want to debug something, we often need to look at the
source code for a function, and if you, in Positron or in RStudio, write the name of a function,
but no parentheses, and click enter on that, send that to the console, there it is. This
is the base R code for the stem function, but that's actually something even nicer. This is
nice in RStudio, but it's even nicer in Positron, is if you view a function, this will pick up in
here. This is the graphics.R, which is the file in the base R source code that contains a stem
function, and we've gone right to the stem function, and now we can see it, and we can see
the definition, and we can see exactly where it is, and we can see this definition, and we can
see that we're starting off by doing a bunch of checks on the arguments, and then you get this
here. Dot call C underscore stem leaf. So, we found something that looks like C. So, let's go
back and check this. C underscore stem leaf, because that worked really nicely for our R
function, it doesn't for C functions. Unfortunately, it's looking for an object. It
does not recognize it. So, this is where we need to go back and look in the source code, but we're
in a dev container, which is a version of VS code. So, we should be able to do this. C underscore
stem leaf, and find it here.
And this is, you can click the little search icon on your top left, but you could also do
control shift F.
Thank you. So, I went control shift F, C underscore stem leaf. Unfortunately, we know that
there is a bug in the current released version of the dev container where this search isn't
working on the first thing. This is fixed in the dev version, but for this version,
we are going to open our settings and we are going to unclick search ignore files.
So, that's just like something that will be fixed in the new release. And I was thinking
about going off the dev version for today, but there is a worse bug than that in the
current dev version. But that's how you fix it for now. And now, if you've done that fix,
we now see it. And here we go. There are a few different functions here. The namespace
and the stem.r, which is where we're calling it. Graphics.h. H is a header file. What we
want is a C file, and we have it here. Stem.c. This here is our definition of C underscore
stem leaf. And now this might be looking a little bit weirder because this is C code,
and it's not only any C code. This is R's C API. So, even if you know some C code,
some of this might look unfamiliar. And in particular, this thing, the S exp is how
all our objects are stored in C. So, C is a type language. So, the return, we need to type for
return and type for all the arguments, and these are the S exps. But let's not worry too much
about that. And let's not and if we go through this, even if we've never seen R's C API before,
if we look at this a little bit, we might start seeing things that look familiar, or at least
we think we can get our head around. So, we're looking at the type of something. So, that seems
kind of intuitive if you're familiar with types of C objects. And if it's not a real S exp, so,
we're looking at something that is real so that we can start to get our heads around the kinds
of things that these must be doing, and we're getting errors if they're not, and we're kind
of keeping on going down, and we're doing lots more checking. There's lots more if, if, if,
and then we get to the meat of something else, which is this function, stem underscore leaf.
So, this is another function here that this seems to be where the meat of the business is,
in this stem underscore leaf function. So, now we can search for stem underscore
leaf.
Yes, and we, I'm going to break us right here and answer one question. And it was from both Nathan
and Brent, because we put a poll in the chat asking about topics, and they both went, wait,
what is unit testing? What a good question. Unit testing is testing the, as small as you can get
them, parts of your code, the little parts that make up the whole, to make sure that your entire
code base is working as expected. So, you could write a unit test that tests a function, or a
function that is called by another function, or a whole little set of functions that do a specific
thing. And all of that testing, you would rerun once you had changed something inside of your
code to make sure that all the bits and pieces of your code were working again as expected.
So, that's what that is. And then let's keep going. The only other thing I wanted to mention
was Isabella stuck something to CS50's course from Harvard, the CS50 course. That's a great
place to learn C, the first six weeks at least are, you're going to lead up to and learn C.
Not exactly the same as the R dev version of C, but a really great place to start. All right,
Ella, take it back away with stem underscore leaf in the C code.
ELLA BOOTH So, we've dug down, we've seen the stem
function, we've seen C underscore stem leaf, and now we're looking at stem underscore leaf.
And if we look here in line 60 and 61, we have found our problem. So, we might argue that this,
at least for the case where you're not seeing anything for running a command like stem of two,
it is because here it is baked in that if we have fewer than one argument, or less than or
equal to one argument, it is just going to return false. And we are done. So, we could technically
argue that this is not a bug because this was deliberate behavior that somebody in our core
wrote into R at some point. And this brings me to another point about contributing to base R.
If you want to make a change to the C source code, you need to have the buy in from an R
core member who is willing to accept that it is a bug or something that they are willing to change.
So, one good place while we're just waiting for this to finish building to look at is Bugzilla.
So, I've mentioned Bugzilla a couple of times now. So, Bugzilla is bugs.R-project.org,
which is the bug tracking system for R. So, this is the R's version of Bugzilla. And I've got an
account in here. And this is where the bugs are. You can think of this a bit like GitHub issues,
but not GitHub and not Git. You can browse. Here's browse for R, the latest bugs by various
different categories. Or if you know the number of the bug, you can type it in here. And we know
that well, you might not know. I know that this is bug 8934. We can see it's closed fixed. But
what you want to be looking at on Bugzilla is, is this a bug that has been reported? If so,
is there any discussion by any member of our core about what kind of fix they would be willing to
consider? So, this is where the bug was originally listed here. And so, it goes on and there is some
discussion here about whether they're willing to fix this or not. So, I am hoping now, yes,
we are built. We are good to go. The next thing that you would typically do, if you are following
through this, is to check that the build has worked. And sometimes on RDevelop, very occasionally,
it doesn't. It should always be a working version of R. I am not going to run that now. Because
this is a tagged release of R. We definitely know that this works. But this is an important command
to know. Because if we, when we are making any changes, we have to run make check to check that
we haven't broken R with our changes.
We've got make check, but the other thing we need to know is which version of R to run.
There is a little script built into the dev container, which is which underscore R. This
is going to tell us which version of R we want to use when we do this. The version we're
building ourselves or the version that is built into the dev container. In the current
release of the dev container, the built-in version is R4.4.1. In the version on the devel
branch of the dev container, that's now up to R4.5. Here, number two is Rdevel. As I
said, we will typically be checking out Rdevel, and it therefore calls this Rdevel, although
in our case, what is Rdevel is really this 4.4.3. I'm going to do number two here. When
we start an R terminal, it's going to use the version that we're building, which is
in this build directory that we now have. That's R. We've got R built into our container
and our development version of that. If I click down here at the bottom, R, not attached,
this is going to attach R, and it is going to give us a familiar-looking R console. Let's
just check this. Stem of two on the version that we have is not working. Nothing is happening.
Stem with one argument, which in this case, I've made it two, and the reason I've always
done this is because that was the version that was in the original bug report. Let's
see what happens. If we go and play with the R source code, let us comment out these two
lines of code. Come on. My. Of all the problems I anticipated having today.
Not being able to comment out something.
Keyboard not working. Oh, you are kidding me.
Aw.
Kidding me.
No control shift C, nothing.
I don't believe so. This is not even, that's not even my, that's not even running off of my
off of my laptop keyboard or my external keyboard. Right. Let's just try reloading that.
Oh, is this going to rebuild our code space? Did we not light enough candles, everybody?
We lit at least one earlier.
Go and light a candle.
We did it.
All right.
All right. So I have deleted two lines of the C source of the R source code, only in my local
copy, only in this dev container. But we are now going to go back to our terminal. We're going to
quit out of R because we now have to rebuild R. And we do that by running make again. And
thankfully this time it's not going to take five to 10 minutes because it only changes the things
that were changed. So that was pretty quick. So now let us reattach R.
And this will be our devel version because that's what we said we wanted, the one based on our
source code. And now let's do stem of two. We have stem of two. Hooray. We fixed R. We fixed R
in the R source code, but only in the dev container. So the next thing that we would do is
the next thing we want to do is run make check. So we're going to let that run for about three
minutes. This always takes the same amount of time. But while we are running make check to check
that taking out those two lines of the source code didn't break anything, we are going to look at
another part of the tutorial, which is here. So let's run make check. And we're going to run
which is here. We're going to go back down here and we're now creating a patch file.
So we are going to do that in a second. Are there any questions while we are waiting for the check
to happen? We've got about a minute or two. I think we're okay. We were all saying that we
forgot to light candles, but also there's just like lots of like, oh, I'm so glad I'm not the
only one who has strange things happen. Like I'm not able to use my keyboard when I'm live coding
you're absolutely not alone. It's scientific proof that if something has never gone wrong before,
it will go wrong when you're live coding. But thanks to my keyboard and not the dev container
and not R or anything like that. So we're running this make check and it's checking and we're seeing
lots of okays. So this is encouraging. So it goes through and it tests all its examples.
Like I would be very surprised if taking out those two lines of R code broke anything.
But you still have to go through this process. And I have worked on bugs that I did not expect
to break things that have broken things. So we're going to let this run. And while we're doing that,
we are going to talk about this creating a patch file. So what we're going to do is create
something that's good. It's a diff file. So these kind of things you might be familiar with
the appearance of them if you've ever used Git and seen those differences. So yes, we are close.
We are very close now to this bit being done. But when we started this, I said that we had
these three different kind of environment variables built in. So we have been working
in the build directory. That was where we were running make and make check and the like.
So the first thing we are going to do when we have our console back is we are going to go back,
change directory back into the source directory. And this kind of to answer the earlier question
about SVN, this is the only other SVN command that we are going to use. So this is the SVN
command. It's going to create a diff. So we'll look for anything that's different.
And it's going to send this into the patch diff that we created and which we can see in here
is the one that we called patches. So patches is currently empty, but we're going to put a patch
in there. Hey, we've got it back. Okay. So we're going to change back. So we're currently in the
build directory. So we're going to copy and paste that and we're going to go back to now we're in
our source directory, the source code files, and we're going to run this SVN command to create a
diff and we're going to put that output into a file in the patch directory. And we're not going
to call it this, because as they advise, you want to name it something that's related to the bug
number and give it some kind of descriptive name. So this is 8934. We're calling this n equals one.
So and that's a dot diff file. So that's the extension. And we're going to run that.
And if we now look back here into our Explorer, we've got in our patches file, here it is.
This is our diff file. So it's not a big diff, because we didn't change a lot. But we have a
revision against our working copy, working copy against the version that was checked out,
and we have deleted three lines of code. So we see that in red, you know, sort of dark red,
it's hard to see. And we've got these subtract signs, because we've taken that away.
So now we have a file. But that file is still stuck in the RDEV container. So we need to get
it out of the RDEV container. And the way we do that, we're going to right click on it,
or whatever you need to do, or whatever operating system you are to get off that menu.
And we're just gonna, we're gonna download it.
I have a question while we're doing that. Yeah, where did we get the bug number from?
So you named it 8934. Was that from Bugzilla?
That is Bugzilla. Yeah.
Okay, fantastic. That was the name of the bug that was that you'd already looked up,
but if it didn't exist yet, it we wouldn't have a bug number.
Exactly. And you would definitely want to be raising a bug and getting some buy in from
Arcore before you went about creating a patch. But also, while we're on the subject of how we
find good first issues, the way that I came about this, and went to work on it was through,
I mentioned under the RDEVEL organization, the RDEV day. So these are issues that kind of get
handpicked as like, good contributor issues. And this one is now closed. But if I call look for
stem in the closed issues, that this was an issue that was pulled out for an RDEVEL day,
which I'll be talking about very, very soon, that says a little bit more about it and some
discussion about how that fix is going to go. But I've downloaded that, and we should now have
on my computer this fix. So now we've got this as just a regular file. Obviously, I have been
practicing this. So this is now got this extra dot two, because I've obviously got another copy
of it somewhere in my downloads file. But if we were now working on this, and we went back to our
bugzilla, we would have an option to add an attachment here, which would be essentially like
a manual way of submitting a pull request. So that is what the our core team could take
and then patch into into beta, which is sort of what happened in this case.
Although, actually, in this case, the fix that we made during the RDEV day was to the vertical bar
alignment issue. And this n equals one issue was such a small one that somebody from our core
team actually just went in and fixed it. And just changed it. No need to submit.
So no need to do it. But like I picked that today, because I thought that was a bug that
we would be able to work through. I have a small question, which might be a big question.
How did you go about adding penguins then? Because it's not a bug, but it's an addition.
Did you post something on bugzilla? Or was that a totally different thing?
This was a completely and utterly different process. So when I got in touch with the
authors of Palmer penguins, it's like, hey, wouldn't it be great if this was in base R?
And they said, yes, it would be. So we had the R project sprint coming up. So there was some
R core people there. So I had a chat with some people from our core about whether they would
like that. And they said that they were happy to. So I did some work on preparing that. And
actually, I do have a link for that. And I think I put that in the notes that I
shared with Isabella. So maybe Isabella can. Because I have put onto Zenodo,
as part of the prep for that patch, I had put onto Zenodo all the files that changed.
And that. So that was fun. But like the hardest part of that part of that project was convincing
our core to do it. That they wanted it because the data is available in part of the penguins.
So they needed to be convinced that it was worthwhile having it in base R. And they also
wanted so that the data was originally published in a plus one article. And they wanted to know
that the results that were reproducible. So actually, a big part of that piece of the work
was going through Kirsten Gortman's original paper and reproducing.
Wonderful.
So all of that is on that Zenodo link.
Thank you for indulging my behind the scenes question.
Oh, yeah, it was it was a fun project to work on. And I'm so glad that we were able to,
we were able to do it. Okay, well, this has actually been absolutely perfect timing,
because I wanted 10 minutes to tell you more about the R Contributor Group, and how you can
get if this has whetted your appetite for contributing to base R, and you are keen to learn
how to do more, how to find out more, I have very many links for you for things you can get involved
with. But I think one of the first questions that I wanted to, to address was really like,
have people considered contributing to base R? And if not, why not? Because I'm really intrigued
about the kind of barriers, barriers to doing it.
I will let everybody chime in in the chat here. Do you use base R? Do you think about base R?
Have you ever thought about contributing? What are some of your barriers to either contributing
What are some of your barriers to either contributing to base R, or maybe learning
more about base R, understanding it better? Understanding the understanding the background?
And I will also ask Ella Brent's question, which is how many people are currently developing base R?
So I believe, if you if you mean, like, actually, on the R core team, I believe that's about 20.
I'm not 100% sure that would be my, my guess. But in terms of a community of contributors,
many dozens, if not hundreds of people are making these these kind of contributions.
And so that's what I want to talk about next is getting involved. Because I'll wait to see what's
kind of coming in on the discord. But I know I've spoken to people about this. And they just kind of
think it's, it's not for people like me, whoever. Yeah. But one of the things I want to highlight
is just how very diverse a group of contributors to base R is. So this is a photo from the art
project sprint, which was a three day event. It was a photo. You're not seeing a photo?
Is anybody else seeing more than I'm seeing? Isabella says no.
No, I'm sharing a pause for some reason. How do I unpause it?
Good question. I was thinking earlier that you were talking about Bugzilla or something,
and I was like, I don't see what Ella's seeing. Maybe earlier.
How long has that been gone? Because I've been showing things this whole time.
I hope a lot of that was caught because did people see what I was doing on Bugzilla? Was that?
I don't think we saw the very end where you had maybe submitted the very last step.
All right. So let me just go back to. But we do see the photo now. And
Renato sort of echoed what you said. Renato said, like, it feels outside my abilities. I don't know
anything about C, and I've never even made an R package. And I think that's a very common sentiment.
Okay, so I want to kind of debug this in two ways. So first of all, I want you to look at
this picture of people who contribute to base R and see a whole range of it. So there's a whole
range of experience levels that are novice, everyone here from novice contributors, people
who haven't contributed to base R before this photo was taken, through to many members of our
core. People are coming from all over the world. We have a good R-Ladies representation. We have
good Rainbow R representation. We have a lot of people, particularly from the global south. This
was all funded. So people's travel and accommodation were funded. And if you think,
oh, no, I missed that. That was three years ago. We're doing it again in September. And
applications are open, and I'm going to share a link in a sec. But the other, I think, part of it
is that kind of feeling of not having enough experience. So just to kind of clarify the level,
so you don't need to, obviously, you don't need to have contributed to base R before to make your
first contribution, that would be kind of circular. But most contributors would have,
like, we would expect people to have a good knowledge of R programming, be able to write
functions, be able to debug functions, you might have some familiarity with writing help files,
and being able to use Git or subversion or some familiarity with the idea of version control
is useful. But it's, like, it's not that high a bar on our knowledge. Just, like, a reasonably
good knowledge and being able to write functions will do. There are some skills that are useful,
being able to program in C can be helpful, having a knowledge of S3 or S4,
knowing something about the stats method that underpin the functions in packages like stats
and splines. That's all helpful. But really, the most important thing is a keenness and an interest.
So there is a bit of an investment in getting started with this. So we'd like people in the
contributor community who, once they've learned how to do it, want to be able to want to keep
contributing. So that's what we're looking for. So what I want to do in the last five minutes is
share a whole bunch of links for how to get involved in the kind of things that we do.
So if you take away one website, one link from today, can it be contributor.R-project.org.
So this is a website for the R contributor working group, and this has, like, everything we do on it.
So how you can join our Slack group, the events that we have coming up, there are tutorials
and demos, and then there are a link to a whole bunch of other resources. So here, the R
development guide is a great one if you want to get started contributing to R. That goes through
the whole process of how to do it. But tons more here you can explore. But in particular on events,
we have R contributor office hours. So these happen once a month, usually not always,
but usually on the second Tuesday of the month, and usually at two different times on that day.
And we've just updated this website. So if you look at this site, hopefully the times you see
here will be in your local time zone. So these are the usual times on the usual days where this
happens. So this is a really great place to come, and it's an office hour, so you just kind of come
and chat, and you can just come and hang out and find out more about it, or you can come with
specific questions or things you're interested in exploring. But the really super exciting thing
are these R Dev Days. There are four of them coming up, and there are three of them are
satellites to other events, and they are different because the rencontre R, which is based off an
event in France and Cascadia R in Portland, if you click through to these links, you can just
sign up to go. Either in person, if you're at those events, or hybrid, and anyone can sign up
to go to those. There are two bigger events, and that's one that is a satellite to the UseR
conference that's happening in Warsaw, which is a one-day event in Warsaw, and then a standalone
event, a three-day R Project Sprint, which is going to be a fabulous get-together of, again,
like that photo I showed, everyone from novice to R core coming together for three days to
really get stuck into this, contributing to Base R and the opportunity to work on some
pretty deep problems over a three-day period. So both the UseR one and the R Project
Sprint, we're taking applications for those because we want to ensure we have a good balance
kind of from novice to experienced. So both of these have associated websites, which we're
going to tell you more about. By the way, I haven't written these pages. I don't keep on
putting my photo up on these. Somebody else has. There you are. But this is actually, this is me
and Kelly Bodwin and Martin Mechler from R core, and this is actually us working on the STEM bug
as it happens. Amazing. Well, we have some feedback that you might be able to address now.
They're not exactly questions, but they are feedback about some sort of barriers to contributing.
And I think that attending one of these R Dev Days will help answer some of these questions
for people. So one says, I considered, yes, but not always sure what the first step is. I tried
getting a Bugzilla account, but got a reply back that I should decide first, not just consider,
but then I don't know how to decide before being able to poke around, you know, kind of wanted to
poke around first. Another is like, I saw a feature request for D player turned down because it was
outside the scope of the package. And I kind of assumed by extension that maybe base R would
similarly have a scope and that additions that I would make might be outside of it. Valid question.
Yeah, that's valid. And R core like very conservative about what they've done.
But you don't know. So I would say like the best places to get started are through the R
contributor. Anything that the R contributor group does is like a really friendly, lovely way to
get involved. So I would recommend joining the Slack group. Instructions there, coming along to
an office hour. And if you are going to be in Warsaw, you don't have to go to use R to come
to it. But probably if you're going to be in Warsaw around that time, you're going to want to
come to use R. And applying for the R project sprint because that is a standalone event and
there's funding as well for travel and accommodation for those three days. So.
Wonderful. Oh, the last one, since we have one minute left, was I haven't thought about
contributing to base R because I thought of it as static software, unlike R packages,
which are kind of always changing and are the preferred way to contribute to R versus, you know,
it's a good assumption. I mean. Yeah. So there are there are major release. Well,
the very major release of like 4.5 point they happen every several years. But the point releases
4.4, 4.5, 4.3, those happen once a year around April. So our point 4.6 is coming out very soon.
And then the patch releases happen every three months. So, yeah, R is a living, breathing
language and we need contributors to keep it living and breathing.
Absolutely. And the last question that we have time for is from Brendan. Is there a similar
process for contributing bug reports or fixes in R tools? If you happen to know, it looks like
bugzilla is empty. Oh, is it empty? I would have said go to browse R tools. But if it's
is it empty? No. Well, maybe the R tools people are just really on top of fixing all that.
Possibly. Maybe there are no problems in R tools right now.
I don't know. I am also super happy to keep talking about this and answer any questions. I am
going to have to hop it at the top of the hour, but I will come back and I will at some point over
the next few days and be around on the Discord and really happy to keep asking and answering
questions. Fantastic. Brent says use R in person only. I believe that that is correct. It is
in person. I believe, yes. Particularly for novice contributors, I think we would
want those people there in person. But the other two are hybrid.
All right. Thank you, everybody. This was so fun. If you are going to come to the Hangout
on Thursday, I will see you there. Otherwise, I will see you on Tuesday of next week.
I will be in the Discord. Thank you, Ella.
This was really fun.
We had fun, too. Thanks, everybody. Bye, y'all.